#42: Testing tutorial: TDD (#45)
exasol/exasol-java-tutorial: testing-tutorial/doc/tdd/red_green_clean.md

In production code the "Don't Repeat Yourself" is an iron rule to avoid maintenance problems through implicitly coupled changes. Quick spoiler: test code is different and applying the rule blindly here can decrease code quality.

Let's first do the naive thing and add more test methods for different cases.

```java
class RoleTest {
    // ...    

    @Test
    void shouldHaveReadPermissionWhenCreatedWithRead() {
        final Role role = new Role(READ);
        assertTrue(role.hasPermission(READ));
        assertFalse(role.hasPermission(WRITE));
    }
}
```

By now, you know the drill:

1. Add the missing constructor (without implementation)
2. Run the test
3. Make sure it fails
4. Implement
5. Rerun the test
6. Make sure it succeeds

You will note that adding a single parameter to the constructor will break the previous test. A variable argument list will resolve the compiler error.

```java
public class Role {
    public Role(Permission... permissions) {
    }

    public boolean hasPermission(Permission permission) {
        return false;
    }
}
```

This is just enough to make the first test pass again and the second fail (which is what we want in step 3).

> Please assign the constructor vararg parameter to an instance variable `permissions` of type `List<String> permissions`. And use a `contains` check in `hasPermission`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please convert the constructor vararg parameter from `Permission[]` to `List<Permission>` and assign it to an instance variable `permissions`. And use a `contains()` check in `hasPermission()`.
```

```java
public class Role {

> private final List<Permission> permissions;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    private final List<Permission> permissions;
```

Both tests are now green.

By this point you probably already think that adding new test methods for such small modifications gets old quite quickly. And you are right.

Remember `@ParameterizedTest`? Let's look at a solution that does all in one test and compare.

```java
class RoleTest {
    @CsvSource({
            "'', false, false",
            "READ, true, false",
            "WRITE, false, true",
            "READ:WRITE, true, true"
    })
    @ParameterizedTest
    void shouldReportPermissionsTheRoleWasGiven(final String grantedPermissionString, final boolean mayRead,
                                                final boolean mayWrite) {
        final Permission[] grantedPermissions = Arrays.stream(grantedPermissionString
                        .split(":"))
                .filter(str -> !str.isBlank())
                .map(Permission::valueOf)
                .toArray(size -> new Permission[size]);
        final Role role = new Role(grantedPermissions);
        assertThat(role.hasPermission(READ), equalTo(mayRead));
        assertThat(role.hasPermission(WRITE), equalTo(mayWrite));

>     }

Reviewer: This test is not in the Java class. Maybe add it additionally there for references

Also, please keep in mind that not all permutations of a test case actually add to the test quality. If you test the same thing over and over again, you are wasting time and energy instead of making your code safer.

Check out [equivalence partitioning](https://www.baeldung.com/cs/software-testing-equivalence-partitioning) as a possible method of reducing the variants to be tested.

### The Danger of Testing Algorithms With Algorithms

One inherent danger of more involved test methods &mdash; especially those that generate variants &mdash; is that you might end up testing an algorithm with itself. This is a recipe for trouble, since it will more often then not make a test pass even if the implementation does the wrong thing.

So wherever possible, please use constant and explicit setup data and expectations.

## Descriptive and Meaningful Phrases (DAMP)

When developers realised that the DRY principle does not always lend itself best to unit tests, of course someone had to come up with a concept that had an opposing acronym. The DAMP principle focuses on readability over the last bit of eliminating duplication. The concepts are _not mutually exclusive_ though.

> Let's go back to our role and permission example. With only permissions two you have four permutations in the role and the code is more expressive when spelled out. If you have ten different permissions, you have 1024 permutations, and it is pretty clear that spelling them all out is neither efficient nor useful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's go back to our role and permission example. With only tow permissions you have four permutations in the role and the code is more expressive when spelled out. If you have ten different permissions, you have 1024 permutations, and it is pretty clear that spelling them all out is neither efficient nor useful.
```

On the other hand we saw that the programmatic approach of generating the permutations has its own problems rooted in complexity and potential waste.

In this particular case limiting yourself to a few short handwritten test cases is the best option.

To pick meaningful examples, let's use a boundary checking approach and make a list of what we want to test:

* no permissions
* one permission
* all permissions

> If you apply this, you get a small set of tests for `toString`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you apply this, you get a small set of tests for `toString()`.
```
Shouldn't we implement `toString()` also TDD, i.e. add a test, then the implementation? This adds three tests at once.

    }

    @Test
    void shouldProduceHumanReadableStringWithOnePermission() {
        assertThat(new Role(READ).toString(), equalTo("Role: read"));
    }

    @Test
    void shouldProduceHumanReadableStringWithAllPermissions() {
        assertThat(new Role(READ, WRITE).toString(), equalTo("Role: read, write"));
    }
}
```

You can see the DAMP principle applied here.

Let's check a couple of criteria:

| Criteria                            | Applies | Details                                                                                             |
|-------------------------------------|---------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Did we avoid all duplication?       | ❌       | There is still a small amount of duplication. The pattern repeats.                                  |
| Do we avoid coupling between tests? | ✅       | Each tests a distinct aspect. Setup is separate. Changing one test does not affect the others.      |
| Are the tests descriptive?          | ✅       | They have proper names that will show up in the test log. The tests themselves are trivial to read. |

> | Are they meaningful?                | ✅       | Thanks to limiting ourselves to boundary cases each of them adds value.                             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Criteria                            | Applies | Details                                                                                             |
|-------------------------------------|---------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Did we avoid all duplication?       | ❌      | There is still a small amount of duplication. The pattern repeats.                                  |
| Do we avoid coupling between tests? | ✅      | Each tests a distinct aspect. Setup is separate. Changing one test does not affect the others.      |
| Are the tests descriptive?          | ✅      | They have proper names that will show up in the test log. The tests themselves are trivial to read. |
| Are they meaningful?                | ✅      | Thanks to limiting ourselves to boundary cases each of them adds value.                             |
```

In sum:

1. Avoid coupling
2. Express the test intent explicitly and clearly
3. Stop compacting the code 

For a more elaborate discussion on DRY and DAMP please check out [[1]](#1).

## Keep Test Preparation In the Test Where Possible

A common pattern that makes test hard to read and even harder to debug is if tests preparation is detached from the actual test.

You all too often see this absolute _anti-pattern_ in applications that use a database backend. The motivation is often misunderstanding the [DRY principle](#dont-repeat-yourself-dry) or premature optimization.

```java
import java.sql.ResultSet;

class DataImportTest {
    @BeforeAll
    static void beforeAll() {
        // ... long list of instructions to set up a test database
        // ... worst case loading data from an external file
    }

    // ... many lines of code

>     static void testSomeAspect() {

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    @Test
    static void testSomeAspect() {
```

        // process data
        final ResultSet result = query("SELECT C1, C3, C6 FROM TABLE T34 WHERE C2 = 'Monday'");
        assertAll(

>                 ()-> assertThat(resultset.size = 7)

Reviewer: This is not working Java code ;)

Disconnecting test and preparation will have you scrolling back and forth. If you load data from external files, reviewers even have to keep multiple editors open.

The tests are fragile. If you modify the global setup, many tests break.

Global setup makes test depending on each other. Unless none of the tests causes a modification, your tests can break each other. Test order becomes relevant.

### Make Test Setup Compact, not Global

Resist the urge to make the setup global wherever you can. You might be worried about your test cases getting too large, but there are ways to make the setup both compact and readable.

Have a look at the [Test Database Builder Java](https://github.com/exasol/test-db-builder-java/) which was written with the explicit goal of compact test preparation in mind.

Note that this library is strictly optimized for readable tests and therefore not suitable for use in production code.

```java
class DataImportTest {
    private static DatabaseObjectFactory factory;
    private static Schema schema;
    
    @BeforeAll
    static void beforeAll() {
        factory=new ExasolObjectFactory(connection);

>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    static void beforeAll() {
        factory = new ExasolObjectFactory(connection);
    }
```

    
    @BeforeEach
    void beforeEach() {
        if(schema != null) {
            schema.drop();
        }
        final Schema schema = factory.createSchema("ONLINESHOP");
    }
    
    static void testImportShopItems() {
        final Table table=schema.createTable("ITEMS", "PRODUCT_ID", "DECIMAL(18,0)", "NAME", "VARCHAR(40)")
                .insert("1", "Cat food")
                .insert("2", "Toy mouse");
        final User user=factory.createUser("KIMIKO")
                .grant(CREATE_SESSION)

>                 .grant(table,SELECT,UDPATE);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    @Test
    void testImportShopItems() {
        final Table table = schema.createTable("ITEMS", "PRODUCT_ID", "DECIMAL(18,0)", "NAME", "VARCHAR(40)")
                .insert("1", "Cat food")
                .insert("2", "Toy mouse");
        final User user = factory.createUser("KIMIKO")
                .grant(CREATE_SESSION)
                .grant(table, SELECT, UDPATE);
```

                        .split(":"))
                .filter(str -> !str.isBlank())
                .map(Permission::valueOf)

>                 .toArray(Permission[]::new);

Reviewer: :+1:

    // ... many lines of code

    @Test
    static void testSomeAspect() {
        // process data
        final ResultSet result = query("SELECT C1, C3, C6 FROM TABLE T34 WHERE C2 = 'Monday'");
        assertAll(

>                 ()-> assertThat(resultset.size, equalTo(7))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                ()-> assertThat(resultset.size(), equalTo(7))
```
